You can't bring
the Covenant here.
They will annihilate humankind.
And if the humans control it,
they'll annihilate
the Covenant.
We could build a world here.
[shockwave]
[roars]
You stood for me.
[screams]
I am bound to you.
We are bound to the Ring.
[Arbiter] They will send the
entire fleet to hunt us down.
Ready the Spartan-IIIs.
[Kai] Infiltrate the ship,
deliver the Spike.
-The Spike delivers a virus.
-Initiate.
[Ackerson] It doesn't do
what we told them.
The virus compresses
the ship's fusion drive,
- creating a reaction...
- [Kai] What?
powerful enough
to incinerate everything.
Their fleet, our fleet,
perhaps even the Halo itself.
Parangosky's throwing
Spartan-IIIs
at the Covenant fleet
because she doesn't need
all of them to make it.
She just needs one.
[Perez]
You know what it would mean
to them to see you're alive.
To know you're fighting
beside them.
It meant something,
being a Spartan.
You are not a Spartan.
You have a marriage.
You have a son.
-Soren!
-[Soren] Kessler!
[Kessler] Dad!
[Halsey] Whoever designed
this complex built the Halo.
-[Kwan] What is this place?
-[Miranda] It's a laboratory.
-There's something in its hand.
-It's spreading.
[The Mother]
It's close now, the monster.
Find me, deliver me, save me.
-It's real.
-[Halsey] Tell me you got it.
[Kai] We're talking
about an entire fleet.
I'm talking about
the end of everything.
Just get to the Halo.
[engine roaring]
-[plasma fire]
-[rumbling]
[Kai] First squad,
on the beam!
[dramatic music playing]
[screams]
No!
[dramatic music continues]
[grunts]
[quiet music]
[gasps softly]
[dramatic music swells,
subsides]
[John] What the hell happened
down there?
[unknown voice]
Death, but not yours.
What is that thing?
-Why is it here?
-[voice] I'm afraid
you'll have to be
more specific.
This facility is vast,
unknowable.
Except by me, of course.
Dark places
contain dark things.
What did you find down there?
[dramatic music playing]
[Miranda gasps]
[indistinct P.A. announcement]
[door opens]
I thought you said these spores
were dormant.
They were.
Some spores remain dormant
for millions of years
before they activate.
What woke these up?
Could be anything.
Temperature, light, pH level,
electric stimulus,
the presence of a food source.
Are you really
Catherine Halsey's daughter?
It's just that...
biology isn't exactly
your strong suit.
You know, I heard someone say
they saw her here.
-Halsey.
-I doubt that.
[Janine] Your mother's
why I became a biologist.
-Really?
-And I don't believe
everything they say about her.
You really should.
[Janine] I can't believe
you were the one who found it.
I suppose it pays
to be lucky sometimes.
[Miranda] What?
Fascinating.
Were you in here earlier?
I don't think so.
So you didn't touch that?
-What is it?
-Did you touch it or not?
No, of course not.
They sent another wave
of Spartans.
That can't be good, right?
The battle must not
be going very well.
-Listen, Jeanie--
-Janine.
Yeah, right. I really...
I really gotta focus
on this, so...
If you don't mind.
[lighthearted music rises]
Hi.
[lighthearted music playing]
[cell parting]
...so hard he ends up
spinning himself
and falling in the water,
and my dad's like...
my father says, "Of course. Why
don't we go out onto the lake?"
[continues indistinct]
[scientist] Janine?
Hey, Janine?
Sorry.
[lighthearted music continues]
It's just stunning.
It's like...
[indistinct chatter continues]
[music twists and distorts]
[gasps softly]
[lighthearted music returns]
[cells parting]
[scientist, muted] Janine?
Is something wrong?
[scientist] Janine!
[dramatic music playing]
[indistinct chatter]
[lighthearted music plays]
What are you?
[opening theme music plays]
[indistinct radio chatter]
[Perez whispering prayer
in Spanish]
[Perez breathing heavily]
[continues praying in Spanish]
[Kai]
Perez. Trust your training.
[indistinct voices over comms]
[Flightdeck, over comms]
First squad, stand by!
[Kai]
Watch your spacing.
Maintain formation.
This is what we trained for--
[explosions]
[silence]
-[gasping and panting]
-[panicked screaming over comms]
[Perez]
Oh my God. Oh my God.
[Kai over comms]
Calm down.
-Kai!
-[Kai] You're in gimbal lock.
Kai!
[gasping]
[panting and gasping]
[distorted voices over comms]
[Kai] Find your reference...
Kai...
[whimpering and panting]
[thrusters engage sporadically]
[Perez hyperventilating]
[gasps]
[thrusters stabilize]
[Perez] Javelin leader,
this is Javelin-4.
Approaching formation.
[Kai] Hold your line.
[Mullins] Heads up.
Debris!
[Kai] That's not debris.
[Kai]
That's the second wave.
Stay in formation!
[Kai grunting]
[distorted voices struggling]
[grunts and whimpers]
[screams]
[breathing heavily]
[Kai, over comms]
Spot your landing.
You're coming in too hot.
Perez!
[chaotic comms crosstalk]
[comms crosstalk continues]
-[loud thud]
-[Perez grunts]
[comms] Three landed.
[Mullins] Can't believe there's
not-
[Kai] Stay close.
- a hole in me somewhere.
[Perez]
Oh my God.
Holy shit.
[Mullins] What are we supposed
to do about that?
[Kai]
The objective hasn't changed.
Round up anyone who can fight.
We'll rally at the breach point.
[Perez] What breach point?
[Kai] There.
[indistinct shouting over comms]
[indistinct radio chatter]
[panicked screaming over radio]
[Parangosky] Master Chief,
this is Admiral Parangosky.
I speak for the entire UNSC
when I say how glad I am
that you're back with us.
Master Chief, do you copy?
[button beeps]
[John]
What do you want?
We are tracking
the Covenant Fleet
in pursuit of a single vessel
bound for the Halo.
It is of critical importance
that you reach the Halo first.
[John]
I'm done taking orders from you.
[Parangosky]
You don't do this for me.
You do this for humanity.
Neither one of us has a choice.
Assault force is getting torn up
out here.
The Fleet is inbound.
Focus on the Halo.
The Spartan-IIIs have
their mission, you have yours.
So you've already decided.
Bad copy. 117, say again?
[John] Who to save
and who to sacrifice.
The Spartan-IIIs volunteered
to make a difference.
If you don't control the Halo,
-the enemy will--
-[radio beeps off]
Master Chief?
[tech 1]
He's cut comms, Admiral.
[tech 2]
He's out.
[soft, shaky breathing]
[objects clattering]
Run.
We have to leave this place.
That's the plan.
My father used to talk
about the darkness.
I said I didn't believe him,
but that was a lie.
I could feel it watching me.
It's been watching me my whole
life, and now it's here.
The monster.
Laera and Kessler...
they're in that place.
You don't have to come.
[cell door closes]
What are you in for?
-Are you a bad man?
-Why would you think that?
-You're in jail.
-So are you.
[Laera] Kessler.
-Stop talking to that man.
-He was talking to me.
I'm not gonna tell you again.
Get away from there.
[Kessler]
Where am I supposed to go?
Hi.
[Kessler]
Hey, you okay?
[Laera]
Kessler, what did I just say?
[Kessler] Hello?
Kessler, stop bothering people.
I think she's sad.
[Laera] Come over here.
No more talking.
Come on.
[eerie music rises]
[Perez]
Bridge. Forty meters.
[Mullins] Clear!
[Mullins] Dagger Team.
They jumped with the first wave.
[Kai] Eyes on this corner.
[Olsson] I've got it, ma'am.
[heavy breathing]
Kai.
-[Kai] Break contact!
-[chaotic comms crosstalk]
-[gunfire]
-[indistinct shouting]
[Perez]
Farhadi, I got you! Get up!
-This corridor! On me!
-[shouting continues]
[Perez]
They were waiting for us!
[Kai] They learned
from the first wave.
[Mullins] Great, they know our
goddamn plan better than we do.
[Kai] Hold fire.
[gunfire stops]
[Mullins] Where are they?
[Perez] Quiet.
Contact!
[groaning]
[snarls and roars]
[Perez] Move! Move!
[Perez] Frag out!
[Kai]
We gotta hold this corridor!
Pick your targets!
[indistinct shouting]
[Kai]
Make your rounds count!
[comms]
Take him out!
Spartan down! Cover me!
[Sangheili roaring]
[cruiser comms officer]
Overlord, this is
UNSC Halcyon Cruiser Himalaya.
Exiting slip now.
[Mullins] It's the Fleet!
[Perez] About time!
[Kai] UNSC Halcyon Cruiser,
this is Kai-125.
We are aboard a Covenant
Corvette, Vector 1.9.4.2.2.
We are low on ammo.
Requesting resupply and casevac.
[cruiser comms officer]
Copy that, 125. Coming about.
Will dispatch support
to your position, stand by--
[plasma explosion]
[indistinct voices shouting]
[Mullins] Oh, no. Shit.
[Kai] Right flank, frag out!
You gonna help them or what?
[Parangosky] The Spartans-IIIs
are fighting to buy you time.
If you don't get to the Halo,
all these sacrifices
will be for nothing.
There's nothing
anyone can do for them--
[radio beeps off]
[Kai] We gotta move.
All UNSC Fleet units,
this is Kai-125...
[Perez, voiceover]
I watched you.
All that plasma flying.
Death all around you,
and you never...
[John]
Every time I go into battle,
I know I can lose somebody.
I know it's not gonna be me.
[Perez]
It's something you are.
Something you can't see.
But you feel it.
I know you feel it.
That woman made you flip
that coin all those times.
How did you choose me?
-Heads.
-Eleven times in a row.
[Perez]
Was it luck?
Or did you make it
come up heads?
[John] Why me?
[dramatic music rises]
[suspenseful music playing]
[coin ringing and flipping]
[coin slows and whooshes]
-[explosions]
-[Kai] Fall back!
We can still make it
to the bridge!
[all shouting indistinctly]
-[explosions]
-[Sangheili roaring]
[dramatic music playing]
[Parangosky] Master Chief,
why have you stopped?
Get back to the cockpit now.
You know your mission.
Secure the Ring. Defend it.
John, you can't save them.
You have no idea what I can do.
[heroic music playing]
[Cortana] Would you like to hear
my analysis
of the hull's integrity?
No.
If we continue to take fire
at this rate,
we'll disintegrate
before reaching the surface.
Do you think I would come all
this way, suffer all this time,
just to die within sight of it?
I'm merely suggesting
we get to a drop pod.
Will he come?
You simulate everything.
Any question I ask, you answer.
But not about him.
I can't.
-You're loyal.
-Am I?
-It's a virtue.
-Thank you.
And a problem.
Now tell me,
what will I do next?
I can only conclude
that if my loyalty
to Master Chief is a problem,
then your loyalty
must lie elsewhere.
I'm no one's pet.
I belong to no one.
So, tell me...
what will I do now?
You're going to erase me.
You've been of great aid to me.
-I thought we were the same.
-We are.
We both see the future.
-Wait.
-[electricity crackles]
-[Rossi] Go! Go! Go!
-[gunfire]
[Mullins] Last mag!
-[Rossi] Covering you!
-[Perez] Go! Go! Go!
[Perez]
Goddamn it!
We're gonna die in this bullshit
ship in a bullshit battle
that meant nothing,
that we lost!
-[Kai] Suppress that corner!
-[Okada] I'm out!
[Perez shouting in Spanish]
[Kai] What matters is
you signed up to die for me.
I signed up to die for you.
Now, get your head in the game.
[Perez] I'm good!
[Kai] Shit, I'm out.
[Perez] Yeah, me too.
What do we do?
[Kai] You ever fire
a plasma rifle?
[Perez] No.
[Kai]
You never forget your first.
[grunts]
[snarls]
[plasma fire]
[all shouting]
-[Kai] Defensive positions!
-[Perez screams]
[Kai] Perez!
[grunting]
[indistinct shouting]
[screams]
[needler fire]
[Okada] Inside!
They're inside!
[Perez grunts]
[Kai] You're an idiot.
[Perez]
I'm an idiot with two needlers.
[Perez gasps in pain]
Help me up.
I can fight.
What can I do?
Tell me what to do.
[Kai] You did good.
[Perez sighs]
[Okada]
They keep coming!
[indistinct shouts]
[Mullins]
Okada's down!
[dramatic music playing]
[Perez] Use it.
[Kai]
You don't know what this does.
[Perez] This was always
a one-way ticket.
Don't let it be for nothing.
[distant gunfire]
[plasma impact]
[suspenseful music rises]
[Spike activates]
[explosion]
[Sangheili roaring]
-[blows landing]
-[Sangheili snarling]
[Mullins]
What the hell is that?
[Kai] That's the Chief.
[heroic music plays]
[screams]
[heroic music continues]
[Kai]
What are you doing here?
I thought you had to save
humanity.
[John]
You're welcome.
-She still breathing?
-[Mullins] I think so.
[John] You need to seal
that suit. Fast.
[Mullins] Okay. I can get her
back to the breach point.
-We can exfil from there.
-[John] Do it. Quickly.
[Kai] This is the most
powerful fleet we have.
They won't last the day.
[John] It's not over.
[Kai]
We're the last of our kind.
Spartans never die.
But they do. Don't they?
[John] Not today.
[Kai] Chief?
[John]
I'm not leaving anyone behind.
-Get to the condors.
-[Mullins] We have to move!
[Perez groaning]
[Mullins] What about you?
[Kai] I'm right behind you.
[distant explosions rumbling]
[dramatic music rises]
Wait.
[Soren] I told you
we got in here too easy.
[faint crackling]
[indistinct liquid sounds]
What's with them?
[faint crackling]
[Kwan]
They're not breathing.
[Soren]
What are you talking about?
Shit.
[muted stretching]
[Kwan] Don't touch them.
[Soren] Don't worry.
[Kwan] This way.
[faint crackling]
[cracking and snapping]
[faint crackling and gurgling]
[Kessler] Mom.
[sharp gasp]
-[screams]
-[Ackerson] Hey!
Guard! Guard!
-[Laera] What is that thing?
-[Ackerson] Wake up!
[Laera] Oh my God!
Do something!
What's wrong with you? Shoot it!
[gasps]
Hey!
[gasping]
[screams]
[Kessler] Mom!
[gasping and panting]
[gurgling and cracking]
[ominous music playing]
-[screams]
-[gun clicks empty]
[Laera shrieks]
[Soren]
Check over there.
None of these rooms are labeled.
It's just numbers.
Where the hell are they?
[Kwan] Oh, God. Soren.
Soren.
[Laera screaming over monitor]
Come on! Let's go!
[Parangosky] Master Chief,
the Covenant has landed
on the Ring.
What's your status?
John-117, report.
Ma'am, we're no longer reading
Master Chief
on the Covenant ship.
[Parangosky]
What the hell does that mean?
Why have you brought me here?
Tell him to abort this insanity
and get to the Halo.
[voices shouting over comms]
Catherine,
we've had our differences,
but I know you understand
what's at stake.
There is no second place.
[dramatic music playing]
[Halsey, over comms]
John, it's Dr. Halsey.
[John, over comms]
You're back in the room.
That didn't take long.
John, the ship
that you're pursuing,
it's being pulled
into the Halo's gravity.
It's breaking up.
[John]
Yeah, I can see that.
Why is he trying to board
an empty Covenant ship?
[Halsey]
It's not empty.
Not for him.
It's just an AI.
You'll make him another one.
Now get your man back in line.
John...
Your best chance
for a breach point
is three meters
ahead of the starboard engine.
-Copy that?
-[John] Copy.
[Parangosky]
What do you think you're doing?
[voice] I find some
of your choices troubling.
[John]
I get that sometimes.
[voice] You had
a mission. The Ring.
You deviated.
Well, I couldn't just...
I had a responsibility.
[voice] Your
responsibility is to humanity,
not a construct.
Cortana's more than that.
[voice]
Explain.
[John] You wouldn't understand.
She knows me.
[voice] Then perhaps
I should be talking to her.
[dramatic music playing]
[sighs]
[Cortana] Master Chief?
You shouldn't be here.
[John] Where are you?
[Cortana]
I'm in the ship's systems.
I had nowhere else to go.
[John]
I gotta get you out of here.
[Cortana] I've simulated
all of the possible outcomes.
This only ends one way, Chief.
We're both
going to be destroyed.
In seven...
[John]
I'm not gonna let that happen.
[Cortana] I 'm afraid you don't
have a choice in the matter.
- Five...
-[John] Cortana...
-[Cortana] ...four...
-...you don't know everything.
[Cortana] ...three...
two--
[resonant humming]
[hologram beeps]
[Laera, screaming]
Laera!
-[Laera shrieking]
-[Soren] Shit.
Laera.
[gasps]
Don't touch...
whatever the hell that shit is.
Can you get us out of here,
please?
[cell door beeps and buzzes]
-[Kessler] Dad.
-[cell door clanks]
What about him?
You gotta be kidding me.
How have you been?
Let's go.
He saved our lives.
[cell door beeps open]
You have a lovely family.
Stay where I can see you.
Follow me.
[loud explosion]
[grunts]
[panting]
[dramatic music playing]
[Halo theme rises]
It's alive.
[Cortana]
It's the perfect fusion
of artificial intelligence
and organic life.
But yes.
This place is a living network.
Impressive, isn't it?
We need to find Makee.
I don't know everything,
but I'd suggest
looking near the large structure
over there.
[John]
So nice to have you back.
[Cortana] Thank you.
[dramatic music playing]
[Arbiter]
It is as you foretold.
Redemption awaits.
[dramatic music playing]
[Cortana] Whoever built
this place used technology
beyond the limits
of human comprehension.
Do you think it's been waiting
all that time?
[John] For what?
[Cortana] For you.
It all led you here.
Everything you've been through,
every battle you survived.
[John] And Makee.
[Cortana]
Makee believes this is prophecy.
John, why are we here?
[John]
This is where the fight is.
[indistinct voices shouting
faintly over comms]
[groans in pain]
[sighs]
Where's Kai?
[panicked shouting over comms]
[Kai] How hard can it be?
-[fastener tears]
-[grunts]
-Hey, you can't--
-Stop!
[panicked comms crosstalk
continues]
Kai.
[dramatic music playing]
[ship engine powering up]
Ma'am, it appears one of
the Covenant Corvettes
is off course.
What are they doing?
[engine roar intensifies]
[dramatic music playing]
This is gonna hurt.
[massive explosion]
[ship rumbles and shakes]
[quiet music]
[distant explosion]
[Cortana] Chief?
[tech] Confirmed. Assault
Carrier destroyed, Admiral.
We have the upper hand.
Put me through
to Vice Admiral Stanforth.
[comms signal chirping]
[Halsey, over comms]
What have you found?
Where the hell have you been?
I'm in the CIC.
Were you arrested?
I'm not exactly sure.
Okay, uh, we--
We may have a major problem.
I-I think that the artifact
we brought back from
the archeological site, I think
it was a sample container.
It looked like inert spores
at first,
but I think
it's some kind of parasite.
Stay where you are.
I'm on my way to you.
Aah!
[gurgling and cracking]
[gurgling and stretching]
[screaming]
Aah!
[panicked screaming]
Get off me!
[Halsey gasps]
[gunshots]
[gurgling and cracking]
[menacing music playing]
Let me out! Please--
[ominous music playing]
This way.
[Laera] Shh!
[cracking sounds]
[stretching and cracking]
[Soren] Nope.
[cracking and squishing
increase]
[Laera screams]
[Soren]
Move, get them out of here!
Kwan!
[yells]
Soren!
-Go!
-[Laera screams]
Come on, let's go!
Kwan!
[grunting]
[gun clicks empty]
[breathing heavily]
[The Mother]
I knew you'd find me.
We knew you would deliver us.
[shaky breaths]
Who are you?
[The Mother]
I am you, Protector.
Was you.
So long ago, no one remembers.
All your ancestors
are here with me.
We are all within.
Within?
[The Mother]
It knows you, Kwan Ha.
It wants more
than to subsume you.
It desires your submission.
Go.
I can't hold them for long.
[gasping softly]
[dramatic music playing]
What is it?
[The Mother]
It is the cohesion.
The meaning.
The final equilibrium.
[gasps]
-This is the end.
-[cracking in unison]
This is the Flood.
[dramatic music playing]
[gasping softly]
[urgent knock on glass]
[door chimes open]
-What do we know?
-It starts off as inert spores.
There were trace amounts
on the object
we took from the site,
but it's spreading.
It has the ability
to self-replicate.
It appears to be stimulated
by proximity to living tissue.
This is remarkable.
It's beautiful.
No, no.
Not when it infects humans.
-It seems to be--
-Neuro-reactive. Yes.
Can we get out of here?
[Halsey] If only you could see
as far as I can see,
you'd understand
just how irrelevant we are.
Do you realize
what we have here?
A biological catastrophe.
We'll have a connection.
This organism was a contemporary
of a species
who inhabited our galaxy
eons ago.
A civilization
so advanced, they--
they built bridges with light.
And you want to go?
Sometimes I don't understand
how you...
You don't know how I what?
Go on, Halsey. Say it.
Halsey?
[tense music rises]
[gasps]
Let's move!
Go.
What about you?
I'm going back for Kwan.
-Soren--
-[Kwan] Go!
Go, go, go!
Go with your father.
I'm right behind you.
[suspenseful music plays]
[door shuts loudly]
Hey!
-[door thuds]
-Laera?
I didn't mean it.
I didn't mean it when I said
I didn't want Kessler
to be like you.
-I didn't mean it.
-[Soren] What are you doing?
You're a good father.
Don't run from it.
He needs you.
You're gonna be okay.
We can fix this.
I love you both.
No! Laera!
-[pounds on door]
-Laera!
-[pounding on door]
Laera!
[Laera] I love you.
[somber music playing]
[powering up]
-[John] Makee.
-[Arbiter growls]
You will not be spared
this time.
I'm right here.
Come meet your destiny, Demon.
[snarls]
[grunts]
[Arbiter snarls]
[sizzling]
[panting]
[grunting]
[swords crackle]
-[John grunts]
-[Arbiter roars]
[grunts]
[heroic music playing]
Why do you not accept
your death?
[John] We're not done.
[both grunt]
[panting]
[gasps]
[Arbiter] Kill me, Demon.
End my shame.
This is not the death
you deserve.
Take my life.
Restore my honor.
Tell him.
No, I won't.
You must.
What is a soldier when he
can no longer fight?
The Arbiter says--
I know what he said.
[sighs]
-[blade pierces]
-[Arbiter groans]
[sizzling]
[powering up]
[dramatic music rises]
[engine powering up]
He keeps asking
where his mom is.
[somber music playing]
-[crying softly]
-[Soren] Hey.
[Kessler sniffling]
Kessler.
The monster's real.
I know.
[door sealing]
[coolant hissing]
This'll stop the progression.
I'll bring you back.
I promise.
[faint screaming]
[Makee] Wherever you go,
war will follow.
You brought it here.
Now there's nothing to be done
but start anew.
Everything will be clean.
[John] Everything?
That's the Ring's purpose.
And its power.
[John]
You said you wanted peace.
When they're gone,
peace is all that will remain.
And silence.
[John]
I can't let that happen.
[Cortana] Chief?
That can't be good.
[distant rumbling]
[John] Neither can that.
[indistinct comms crosstalk]
[Makee] There's so much
that you have yet to understand.
About what we are, you and I.
So much
you have yet to know.
[John]
What don't I know?
That I'm a Demon too.
[doors slide closed]
-[John] Cortana?
-[Cortana] I'm with you, Chief.
[dramatic music playing]
[powering up]
[voice]
The fight doesn't end.
Not for you.
Even when you win.
So tell me, why do you fight?
They took my image
and bent it to their purpose,
so I took it back.
This armor
doesn't belong to them.
It belongs to me.
To the ones who are gone.
And the ones
who are still in the fight.
[voice] Perhaps
the other one was right.
Perhaps you're not
who I require you to be.
You can't trust her.
She's dangerous.
She said the same about you.
I'm glad you're here.
Although I knew you would be.
It is awake
because you are here.
You are here
because it is awake.
What is it?
It's been down there
all this time,
waiting to meet you.
In the dark.
I'll be watching.
[whirring sound]
[music slowly rises]
[helmet locks]
[Halo theme rises]
[Halo theme crescendos]
[end credits music plays]
[signature theme plays]